In the interests of transparency, eLife includes the editorial decision letter and accompanying author responses. A lightly edited version of the letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the most substantive concerns; minor comments are not usually included.

Thank you for submitting your article "Recurrent loss of HMGCS2 shows that ketogenesis is not essential for the evolution of large mammalian brains" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by three peer reviewers, including Vincent J Lynch as a guest Reviewing Editor and Reviewer #1, and the evaluation has been overseen by Wittkopp as the Senior Editor. The following individuals involved in review of your submission have agreed to reveal their identity: Cristian Cañestro (Reviewer #2); Kevin Campbell (Reviewer #3).

The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.

Summary:

In this manuscript Jebb and Hiller report the loss of the HMGCS2 gene in three mammalian lineages, which is very surprising given the role HMGCS2 plays in acetoacetate synthesis. This is surprising because fatty acid-derived ketone bodies provide energy for the brain during neonatal development and fasting suggesting there is strong selection to maintain this gene and pathway. These data suggest that cetaceans, Old World fruit bats, and Proboscideans either evolved alternative metabolic strategies to deal with HMGCS2 loss or some other functionally similar gene performs a similar role as HMGCS2.

Essential revisions:

1) If ketones are no longer used for ATP production do other genes in the pathway show evidence of reduced purifying selection or loss?

2) Given the ability to estimate a relative date of loss of elephants why not bats and cetaceans?

3) Please confirm HMGCS2 loss using the more recent loxAfr4 assembly; It's likely missing in loxAfr4 as well but best to confirm.

4) The fact that HMGCS1 is localized in the cytosol, and not in mitochondria, implies that HMGCS1 cannot rescue the lack of HMCGS2 (if so, please mention in the manuscript, and provide references supporting this fact). Along these lines, is it possible to show that HMGCS1 does not have a putative gain of a "novel alternative exon1" in HMGCS1 coding for a mitochondrial targeting domain could allow to make this paralog to be functionally redundant with HMGCS2 (and making it therefore dispensable)? While the reviewers understand that this scenario may be remote, in such case those species could continue producing ketone bodies, which therefore would significantly affect the main conclusions of the manuscript. Is there EST (transcriptomic) data for any of the species that has lost HMCGS2 to discard (or at least check) that possibility? Gene prediction software could also be helpful to check for the presence of such potential mitochondria-target exon in HMGCS1 (which in principle should be shared within each group of mammals that share the loss to corroborate its presence).
