In the interests of transparency, eLife publishes the most substantive revision requests and the accompanying author responses.

[Editor’s note: review comments and author responses relating to electrophysiology data, which were included in an earlier version, have been omitted.]

Congratulations, we are pleased to inform you that your article, "5-hydroxymethylcytosine mediated active demethylation is required for neuronal differentiation and function", has been accepted for publication in eLife.

Thank you for submitting your work entitled "5-hydroxymethylcytosine mediated active demethylation is required for neuronal differentiation and function" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by 3 peer reviewers, one of whom is a member of our Board of Reviewing Editors, and the evaluation has been overseen by a Reviewing Editor and a Senior Editor. The reviewers have opted to remain anonymous.

Reviewer #1 (Recommendations for the authors):

In this manuscript the authors carry out epigenomic profiling purified Purkinje cells across key stages of cerebellar development to study the regulation and function of 5hmC. The authors have previously published a method for isolation of FACS-based nuclear sorting for these cells and here they use it to isolate from P0, P7, and adult cerebellum with high quality RNA, mC/hmC, ATAC and ChIP-seq data at each time point in biological replicate. The chromatin data are correlated against developmental changes in gene expression and suggest broad mechanisms of chromatin control that are, for the most part, in line with previous studies of other cell types. The authors are particularly interested in regions of the genome that show loss of mCG (and hmCG) over developmental time and are near genes that show enhanced expression in adult PCs. They test the requirement for the Tets in the developmental demethylation of these regions by knocking out all three Tets in a PC specific manner at P7, then running RNA/mCG/hmCG sequencing in adult to compare between cTKO and control.

PCs are a biologically important class of neurons and they are a very different cell type from others that have been developmentally studied. For these reasons the descriptive chromatin data gathered here are of use to the community. However, the analyses performed on the data as presented here are somewhat underdeveloped. I

Reviewer #2 (Recommendations for the authors):

TET dioxygenases (TET1, TET2, TET3) mediate the conversion of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), which may lead to additional forms of DNA modifications and ultimately DNA demethylation. In dividing cells, the maintenance DNA methyltransferase recognizes poorly of 5hmC, which leads to passive DNA demethylation through replacing the 5hmC sites with unmethylated cytosine after rounds of DNA replication. However, whether 5hmC undergoes demethylation in non-dividing cells, for example through TDG-BER dependent active DNA demethylation, and how it may impact gene transcription and cellular properties remain elusive. To answer these questions will particularly expand our current understanding of TET catalyzed methylcytosine oxidation in the brain, the organ that has not only the highest levels of 5hmC, but also thousands of millions of non-dividing neurons that remain plastic throughout life.

Purkinje neurons in cerebellum subject to orchestrated postnatal migration, arborization, and synaptogenesis after their final cell division at mid-gestation stage. The study focuses on this neuron type and generates single base resolution 5mC and 5hmC mapping at three developmental stages (P0, P7, young adult). In addition, it profiles the Purkinje neuron specific transcriptiome (nuclei RNAseq), epigenome (H3K4me3, H3K27me3), and chromatin accessibility (ATACseq). The study therefore displays novel modes of epigenomic alterations that are associated with transcription regulation, which also confirms DNA methylation turnovers during Purkinje neuron post-mitotic maturation. Furthermore, the study generates a conditional knockout mouse line with all three TET enzymes selectively deleted in Purkinje neurons. The deficiency of TET enzymes not only impedes the DNA methylation changes during Purkinje cell postnatal maturation, but also alters neuronal excitability that increases susceptibility to an excitotoxic drug. Therefore, the study demonstrates a requirement of dynamic 5mC/5hmC changes during cerebellum Purkinje neuron post-mitotic maturation and their implication in neuronal function.

The study has successfully addressed a few technical challenges, such as the low abundancy of Purkinje neurons, to profile 5mC and 5hmC separately, and to generate a cell type specific triple TET knockout mouse line. The data are of good quality (e.g. Figure S1). Overall, the conclusions are supported by the data. Epigenetic modifications have been known to play cell type specific functions. However, the majority of current research is limited by the heterogeneity of tissue samples that lack a cell type specific resolution. To study DNA modifications in a defined neuron type, as shown in this manuscript, provides valuable novel insights (e.g. as mentioned in the Discussion, the changes are specific to Purkinje cells, but not observed in cerebellum granule neurons). In addition to sequencing 5mC and 5hmC side by side, the study also analyzes CG and CH regions separately. The study recognizes unique patterns of 5mC, 5hmC, CG and CH changes, respectively, which suggest the complexity of DNA modification in the brain. The set of genes that are associated with DNA methylation valley dynamics are particularly interesting. The genomic datasets and the mouse line derived from this study will also serve as a good resource for related work.

Through RNAseq, less than 2000 genes are found to be differentially expressed during Purkinje neuron maturation. The study therefore spends major efforts on analyzing the epigenetic changes at these genes. However, it is not sufficiently clear of the epigenetic status of the vast majority of genome beyond the differentially expressed genes, even though some indicative findings are revealed at regions with "gain" or "loss" of chromatin accessibility (Figure 2K-N). To assess this, it will be helpful to further characterize intergenic regions in the future, for example through genomic profiling of enhancer markers H3K4me1 and H3K27ac.

An enhancer marker ChIPseq is preferred, but not required. Below are some suggested revision points.

1. It will be informative to demonstrate the transcription levels of the three TET family members during Purkinje neuron maturation. This can be obtained from the RNAseq data that the authors have generated.

2. The transcriptome and epigenome differential lists should be provided in supplements.

3. It is unclear if both males and females are included in the genomic assays and animal work.

4. Though the number of cells utilized in each genomic assay is stated in methods, it will be helpful to describe the corresponding number of animals.

[Editors’ note: the authors submitted for reconsideration following the decision after peer review. What follows is the decision letter after the first round of review.]

Thank you for resubmitting your work entitled "5-hydroxymethylcytosine mediated active demethylation is required for neuronal differentiation and function" for further consideration by eLife. Your revised article has been evaluated by Catherine Dulac (Senior Editor) and a Reviewing Editor.

The manuscript has been improved but there are some remaining issues that need to be addressed, as outlined below:

Reviewer #1 (Recommendations for the authors):

In the first round of review I raised two main concerns about the molecular data – the novelty of the findings and the depth of the analysis linking Tet-mediated DNA demethylation with PC maturation. One of the other reviewers raised concerns about the physiology of the Tet cKO mice.

1. Novelty of the findings

The first concern was the degree of novelty in showing Tet-mediated DNA demethylation in post-mitotic neurons. My concern arose from the language used by the authors in their manuscript. In the abstract of the revised manuscript they state, "is it not known whether 5hmC is required for terminal differentiation or if it can serve as an intermediate in active DNA demethylation in postmitotic neurons." This assertion does not jibe with my reading of the literature. My concern was amplified when I read the sentence at line 68 in the introduction that says, "Tet mediated replication dependent passive demethylation is thought to be common in many dividing cell types, including progenitor cells in the developing forebrain (Rudenko et al. 2013), hippocampus (Guo et al. 2011) and cerebellum (Zhu et al. 2016)." This is an inaccurate statement regarding these papers from the literature.

Rudenko et al. studied DNA methylation in adult brains of a Tet1 knockout mouse and found hypermethylation of activity-regulated gene promoters in the knockout compared with wildtype. I appreciate that because this was a germline knockout that this study does not rule out the possibility that the increases in methylation occurred in dividing progenitor cells and were maintained. However, the authors of the current manuscript are over-reaching to conclude that the changes in methylation seen in the Rudenko study were indeed the result of passive demethylation in progenitors, given that this was not tested in the study. The Guo and Zhu studies knocked down Tets in postmitotic neurons. In the Guo 2011 study the authors injected shRNA-bearing AAVs targeting Tet1 in adult dentate gyrus. In the Zhu 2016 study the authors lentivirally infected primary CGN cultures with shRNAs targeting Tets 1 and 3. Both studies showed increases in DNA methylation in knockdown compared with wildtype neurons. In the Guo study this was in the context of seizure-induced demethylation of the Bdnf and Fgf1b genes, and the demethylation was blocked by Tet1 KD. Although there are a few progenitors in the adult dentate gyrus, it is not reasonable to attribute the methylation effects to only these few cells if that is what the authors mean by saying this study was in progenitors. The authors of the Guo paper concluded that Tet1 acted to actively demethylate DNA in postmitotic hippocampal neurons, and their data support that conclusion. The Zhu 2016 used primary CGNs in culture, which have been shown by many groups (using the specific protocol derived from the Hatten lab) to be fully post-mitotic within the first 24 hours after plating. shRNA-mediated knockdown occurs on the order of days (cells were studied at 3DIV). Therefore, the assumption of Guo 2016 in their conclusions that the Tets are acting to mediate these changes in post-mitotic neurons is justified.

Later (line 274) the manuscript references Lio 2016 to cite that prior studies have established that the activation of enhancers is accompanied by increased accessibility and loss of DNA methylation. At line 291 the authors suggest that the DNA demethylation they find in PCs is novel because "in this case…DNA demethylation does not require cell division." I agree it is true the PC data shows postmitotic demethylation, however it was also shown in PMID 32589877. In that study the authors purified nuclei of SST+ and VIP+ neurons from the mouse cortex during development. These experiments were done during comparing interneuron nuclei isolated at P7 with those from P13, both stages at which these neurons are already postmitotic.

These discrepancies in the manuscript between the authors' assertions of what these studies showed and the published data need to be corrected to be accurate.

It was because the authors suggested the novelty of their study as the first to show Tet-mediated active DNA demethylation in postmitotic neurons that I questioned that novelty. As the literature review above shows, this manuscript is not the first to show Tet-mediated active DNA demethylation in postmitotic neurons.

However, this manuscript does do a particularly nice job of it. I think the novelty of the study lies in linking the molecular characterization of PC chromatin regulation during development with the biology of this cell population. With this in mind, I agree with the authors that the body of the data and the analysis do make a significant new addition to the literature that will be of broad interest.

2. Depth of the analysis linking Tet-mediated DNA demethylation with PC maturation

In this revision the authors have significantly expanding and clarified the section on the molecular sequencing from Tet1/2/3 cKO mice, strengthening the impact of the data. However, even though this is a revised manuscript there are some important omissions and errors in this section that undermine the power of the data to support the model.

– Line 193, 5hmc continues to increase over highly expressed genes – where is that evidence?

– Line 202 "Furthermore, 5hmCG accumulated over the genes bodies early in development is not removed (Figure 2C)," actually what this figure shows is that for the downregulated genes there is an increase in 5hmCG over the gene bodies between P7 and adult, so it is not only not lost, it is gained. It looks no different for the downregulated genes than the upregulated genes.

– Where is the data that goes with line 372 – growth of the DMV preceded by 5hmC and starts at 5' end

– Line 376 -The text that follows this (to line 381) is entirely speculative and does not belong in the methods.

– Figure 4S2 E-G are not cited in the text.

– Line 496 – the authors state they have not seen demethylation in CGNs with no attribution and no data. Also, this contrasts with the Zhu 2016 paper so should be discussed in comparison.

Furthermore, one of the important parts of this section regards the relationship of the chromatin changes in the Tet cKO to the gene expression effects and this part would benefit from more discussion. For example, one of the best example genes for Tet mediated demethylation the authors show it Iptr and yet they specifically say this epigenomic change does not influence Iptr expression (which is key since this is the gene product used for PC isolation). Also, it is surprising that in the Tet1/2/3 cKO mice, expression of genes encoding synaptic proteins and differentiation markers are the major class elevated, not repressed. Might this suggest that the Tets actually slow differentiation rather than promoting it as the text seems to imply? Either would be interesting, but the data shown needs to be reconciled with the statement (line 106) that "maturation in Purkinje Cells … require continued oxidation of 5mC to 5hmC".