In the interests of transparency, eLife publishes the most substantive revision requests and the accompanying author responses.

Acceptance summary:

This paper suggests a potential explanation for the known contributions of the hippocampus to adaptive decision-making in the face of temporal delays. Masuda et al. dissociate delay and reward value behaviorally, and are therefore able to show that these decision variables are encoded in distinct populations of neurons in the mouse hippocampus.

Decision letter after peer review:

[Editors’ note: the authors submitted for reconsideration following the decision after peer review. What follows is the decision letter after the first round of review.]

Thank you for submitting your work entitled "The hippocampus encodes delay and value information during delay-discounting decision making" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by three peer reviewers, one of whom is a member of our Board of Reviewing Editors, and the evaluation has been overseen by a Senior Editor. The reviewers have opted to remain anonymous.

Our decision has been reached after consultation between the reviewers. Based on these discussions and the individual reviews below, we regret to inform you that your work will not be considered further for publication in eLife.

Although there was broad agreement that the issue of how delay length is encoded in the activity of hippocampal neurons is timely and important, the manuscript lacks the critical analyses needed to evaluate whether there is a meaningful advance towards this goal.

In particular, all reviewers agreed that a permutation test is required to support the important central claim that some number of neurons encode delay length. However, even in the best case scenario where the currently reported number passes such a test, the small number of neurons encoding delay length would limit the significance of the finding. Relatedly, several reviewers felt the analyses performed did not appropriately take the known properties of "time cells" into account. Please see the reviews below for a more detailed explanation of these concerns.

Reviewer #1:

This study by Masuda and colleagues seeks to characterize differences in hippocampal activity during the delay phase of an intertemporal choice task. The question of under what circumstances and through what mechanism the hippocampus contributes to such delay discounting has received considerable attention in the human decision-making literature and in rodent behavioral neuroscience studies. Surprisingly, no studies appear to have asked how the rodent HC represents such choices in ensemble neural activity. Thus, I am excited about the potential of the study to fill a conspicuous neural representation gap in our working model of how the HC contributes to intertemporal choice.

The authors correctly identified that temporal discounting requires encoding of multiple different delay lengths, rather than simply the presence or absence of a delay. They therefore include different delay conditions in their task, so that firing rate and delay length can be correlated in each individual neuron. The main finding appears to be that a small set of neurons (<10% overall; 3 out of 58 and 8 out of 83 for delay-activated and -suppressed neurons respectively) encodes delay length thus defined. I do not find this result very informative for a number of reasons.

First, the authors should perform permutation tests to establish a chance distribution to compare these numbers to.

Second, the data suggest this analysis does not capture the properties of CA1 ensemble activity adequately: the population averages (Figure 4B) show a non-monotonic relationship with delay length, and the peri-event time histograms show the characteristic distribution of peak firing rates across the delay previously shown by Pastalkova, MacDonald, and others. The "retiming" experiments suggest that the sequence of firing reliably distinguishes the different delays - wouldn't this provide a very different affirmative answer to the authors' question of how HC activity encodes delay?

Third, although the authors manipulate reward amount and report how such changes affect delay-activated vs. -suppressed neurons, I could not find how the delay-encoding neurons specifically (the 3/58 and 8/83) were affected by reward amount. This is crucial to establish, because of the possibility that what looks like delay coding could actually be more general expected value coding.

Thus, to convincingly address the seemingly simple question of how HC activity relates to delay length the authors need to confront two tricky issues which are currently not adequately addressed:

1) Considering different coding schemes, such as sustained parametric coding of delay in individual neurons (e.g. short: 1Hz, medium, 2Hz, long: 3Hz), and dynamic sequence patterns that may differentiate between delays (e.g. short: neuron A->B->C, medium: B->D->E, long: C->D->F), and others.

2) Disentangling delay length from known covariates, such as expected value and movement.

Note that I have not commented on the substantial number of other analyses reported, such as activity dependence on location, the temporal distribution of firing rates, and temporal shifts with experience. These are helpful for reference but do not seem to speak to the main question of how different delay lengths are coded. Similarly, a potentially valuable component of the study is the altered behavior and neural activity in CA1 NMDAR knockout mice, but given the issues above, it is presently unclear how this should be interpreted.

Reviewer #2:

In this manuscript, Masuda and colleagues investigate an interesting and important question: how does the hippocampus represent a delay-based decision making task? The authors identify populations of neurons that fired (or ceased to fire) while mice waited in the delay zone, and showed that in a subset of these neurons delay-zone firing rate correlated with delay length. Interestingly, populations of delay-activated and delay-suppressed neurons showed opposite effects when reward size was decreased and then restored. Finally, the authors repeated many of these analyses in NMDA receptor knock-out mice, and found altered patterns of decision making and neural representations in these animals.

Given the wealth of evidence that hippocampus is important for decisions involving delays, an attempt to understand what is going on at the single-unit level during the delay period is an interesting and potentially valuable contribution to the literature. However, the most interesting and novel effects reported here are identified in very small numbers of neurons, raising potential questions about the robustness of the effects. In addition, the logic of the authors' method of identifying delay suppressed and activated neurons is unclear.

Samples sizes and neural effect sizes

Many of the effects reported in the manuscript are identified in small subgroups of neurons. I think this is partially because the authors ran several variants of the task and did not necessarily record large numbers of neurons for each of those different conditions, but even for the main task the authors report that mice typically performed around 10 trials per session, which is not so many for neural data analyses. This means that interesting effects like the potential correlation between firing rate and delay length are identified in rather small populations of cells (3/58 delay activated and 8/83 delay suppressed cells). These number are low, both in terms of the fraction of neurons that show the effect (which is pretty near chance for this example; 5% and 9% of neurons), and the total number of neurons analyzed for each effect, which raises the possibility that the analyses are somewhat underpowered and potentially spurious. Similarly, the delay-dependent shift in firing location (reported in Figure 5) is identified in 4/33 cells. The percentage of neurons whose firing rate changed during the revaluation procedure (where the delayed reward was decreased and then restored back to the normal size) was not reported, but the entire analysis was conducted on 30 delay activated neurons and 39 delay suppressed neurons, which is again a small number of cells to reliably detect changes.

Besides the issue of the number of cells recorded under different conditions, there are other aspects of the data that I don't understand and cannot parse by reading the paper. For instance, in the reward revaluation analysis there are pretty dramatically different numbers of neurons in the devalued and revalued conditions, meaning either that for some reason cells were lost between trials (indicating pretty serious recording instability), or this analysis was actually conducted across different recording sessions (rendering a comparison of absolute different in firing rate fraught, as it's unclear what fraction of neurons were recorded in both sessions). The fact that I'm still not entirely sure how this part of the experiment was carried out points to some issues with the methods description; with some many different variants of the task, it would be nice if more detailed descriptions of each were provided, along with a detailed timeline of which order the variations occurred in.

Approach for detection delay-activated and delay-suppressed cells

Given the naming of these cells, my initial impression was that they were populations of neurons that either increased or decreased their firing rate with increasing or decreasing delay. In fact, only very few neurons in their sample showed that sort of behavior. Instead, these groups of neurons are identified based on comparing their average firing rate in the delay zone with their average firing rate everywhere else on the track. To me, this makes it hard to specifically say the neurons identified in this way were specifically modulated by delay (as their naming implies), because the delay zone has other properties that set it apart from the rest of the track. Presumably animal's movement speed is low here, while it is high everywhere else on the track expect perhaps the reward zone. It's also the part of the maze where mice presumably spend the greatest total amount of session time. To anthropomorphize a bit, it's probably the region of the maze associated with the most frustration or annoyance due to the delay. All of these factor could be reasons for detecting a difference in firing rate in this particular location relative to every other location on the maze. Again, if the change in firing rate were linked directly to systematic variations in delay, I think that would go some ways towards ruling out other possibilities like the ones I mentioned here, but in fact, the data indicate that neurons firing rate correlated with delay length are quite rare.

Reviewer #3:

The authors of the study investigated the activity of CA1 neurons in the mouse during a delay discounting task. The main finding is that the activity of select CA1 neurons can reflect reward temporal delay, amount, and location by delay-activation or delay-suppression of spiking activity in a NMDA-dependent manner. The authors conclude that distinct subclasses of hippocampal neurons support delay-discounting decisions of the animals. The results of the study are novel and interesting and can only suggests several ways to further improve the significance of the current results.

1) Some of the reported effects are rather small (one example: proportion of neurons showing correlation between changes in firing rates and amount of delay at 5.1%, paragraph two of subsection “Delay-dependent neuronal activity in the CA1”). To test the significance of such effects above chance variability, whenever possible, the authors should compare these proportions with those obtained by shuffling neuronal activity, for instance shuffling neuronal identity across different delays, and show the control proportions are lower.

2). There two classes of responsive neurons, delay-act (+) and delay-sup (-). Aside from this feature, is there any other property of these cells that would allow them to be distinguished as two classes of neurons (see Discussion paragraph one)? Related to this, the significant correlations between delay duration and amount of change in firing rate the authors like to emphasize on appear positive (and small) for both delay+ and delay- neurons. Intuitively, I would have expected the interesting correlations to be negative for the delay- neurons and positive, and in higher proportions, for the delay+ neurons. The authors should discuss the significance, importance and implications of these findings.

3) The NR1KO CA1 neurons are known to generally fire with reduced rates compared with control animals. The reported z-scores might become noisier in the mutant animals due to their reduced baseline rates, which could result in reduced proportions of delay+ and delay- neurons compared with controls. The authors should compare the delay+ and delay- activity of NR1KO neurons with that of a subpopulation of control neurons with mean firing rates similar to those of KO ones, in addition to all control neurons.

4) The authors report the recording of inhibitory neurons activity (INT). I suggest the authors further explore this activity in the context of delay+ and delay- activity of putative pyramidal neurons (PYR) as a possible clue to the diversity of neuronal response to delay. For instance, is there any putative synaptic PYR-INT connection detectable in cross-correlations between individuals of these neuronal groups that changes with temporal delay or that could explain the two proposed classes of PYR neurons as well as the effects of NR1 KO?

5) Please indicate which animals were recorded with silicon probes and what kind of probes were used (recording sites configuration).

[Editors’ note: further revisions were suggested prior to acceptance, as described below.]

Thank you for submitting your article "The hippocampus encodes delay and value information during delay-discounting decision making" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by three peer reviewers, one of whom is a member of our Board of Reviewing Editors, and the evaluation has been overseen by Laura Colgin as the Senior Editor. The reviewers have opted to remain anonymous.

The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.

Summary:

The reviewers agree that the main conclusion of the paper, that there are distinct signals related to delay and value in the activity of CA1 neurons, is now supported by the improved analyses in this revision. They also highlighted two remaining issues that the authors should be able to address with existing data and careful attention to communicating the logic and motivation for the analyses in the text.

Essential revisions:

First, the authors should add an up-front discussion of the possible ways in which delays could be coded in principle, followed by justification of the specific analysis methods chosen. It should be clear to the reader how the methods used are able to identify which of these schemes are supported by the data. See reviewer #1 for more details.

Second, more information and discussion related to the possibility that the NMDA receptor knockout may have spread beyond the hippocampus proper should be added (see reviewer #2).

Reviewer #1:

In this resubmission, the authors have added a number of important additional analyses, in particular (1) permutation tests to establish the statistical significance of the main results, and (2) a direct comparison of delay coding and "reward coding", showing that putative delay coding is not a consequence of temporal discounting of reward (Figure 7E).

A further major change is that the cell numbers (and percentages) coding delay is now an order of magnitude higher than in the original submission, a difference the authors explain is due to computing correlations between delay and firing rate on a trial-by-trial basis, rather than by first averaging across trials.

With these additions, I think the authors have provided solid evidence that the firing rates of a substantial proportion of CA1 neurons is parametrically related to delay length in the main "extension" version of the task.

However, as I wrote in my original review, the authors still do not seem to give consideration to the multitude of ways CA1 population activity can be said to encode delay length. There are previous findings in the literature (such as the MacDonald et al. and follow-up "time cell" papers) that lay out a specific "sequential activation" scheme for what delay activity could look like. It may be that this is not what happens in this data set, but they need to explicitly identify this possibility and then treat it with corresponding analyses.

More generally, the paper really needs an up-front discussion of the possible ways, neural coding schemes, in which delays could be coded in principle, followed by motivation/justification of the specific analysis methods that are able to identify which of these schemes are compatible with the data. Without this, many of the analyses lack a clear logical connection to possible interpretations. Just as one example, suppose that delay activity were to look as follows: short delay is coded by sequential activation of cells A-B-C, longer delay by A-B-C-D-E, and longest delay by A-B-C-D-E-F-G. The “mean firing rate” of cell A will now be parametrically related to delay length, because the same spiking activity will be normalized by a different length time window. I'd say this would be a misleading way of claiming that cell A encodes delay length, because activity isn't actually different between the three delays! I am aware the authors also use peak firing rate, which avoids this particular pitfall (but has other issues, how would a downstream decoder read this out?), but I'm using this example to hopefully impress on the authors the need to clearly motivate their choice of analysis.

There are other points in the manuscript where I found the logic difficult to follow. For instance, I think the analyses in Figure 7E is the logical next step after having shown that there is (in a certain number of cells) a relationship between delay and firing rate. Given that initial result, I would want to know to what extent such a relationship could be the result of correlated/confounding variables such as discounted reward value. In other words, are these neurons "just" coding value? From the authors' rebuttal, I get the impression that I somehow did not make this point fully clear. I will try again. Even though the actual outcome, number of reward pellets, is not changed, a change in delay means that for longer delays, the subjective discounted value is smaller. Thus, in the basic "extension" design, delay length is perfectly (inversely) correlated with subjective value, and it is therefore essential that the authors test if such a value-based account is the best explanation. It is a strength of the study that the authors have data that can address this, but the importance and logic of this argument currently is not clear from the paper, and the fact that the key result is "buried" in Figure 7E does the paper a disservice.

Reviewer #2:

In this revised version of the manuscript, the authors have addressed satisfactorily all my comments. The main concern regarding the low number of coding neurons has been addressed with new data analysis and the proportions of significant neurons are more convincing. Moreover, key terminology has been revised according to reviewers' comments and additional explanations have been added as requested. Overall, the manuscript has improved significantly. There remain several typos throughout the manuscript, mostly on the newly added text. The authors should proofread the manuscript and fix all these errors. Given the completion of that process, I have no further comments and I recommend the manuscript for publication.

I would like for the authors to include a new Table showing the ages of KO animals whose electrophysiological activity was reported in the manuscript (Figure 8, Figure 8—figure supplement 1). This is important as the authors state that in some of these animals the deletion of NMDAR spread beyond the CA1 area. The authors should also perform and report data analyses that are restricted to KO animals that were between 1-2 months of age at the time of ephys recording when NMDA deletion is restricted to CA1 area. If the authors want to maintain the statement currently in the Abstract and throughout the manuscript that "genetic deletion of NMDA receptor in hippocampal pyramidal cells impaired delay-discount behavior and diminished delay-dependent activity in CA1", they should show that this is indeed the case in the subgroup of animals where the NMDA KO was restricted to CA1 pyramidal neurons or at least the hippocampus (not entorhinal cortex or other brain areas). Otherwise, the authors should disclose that the reported effects might be contributed by NMDA deletion outside the hippocampus and name those brain areas. It would also really help if the demonstration of CA1 specific deletion of NMDAR in KO animals used in the ephys could be supported by immunohistochemistry.
