Summary:

Debeuf et al. introduce a new, fast method for the selection of suitable T cell clones to generate TCR transgenic mice, a method claimed to outperform traditional hybridoma-based approaches. Clone selection is based on the assessment of the expansion and phenotype of cells specific for a known epitope following immune stimulation. The analysis is facilitated by a new software tool for TCR repertoire and function analysis termed DALI. This work also introduces a potentially invaluable TCR transgenic mouse line specific for SARS-CoV-2.

Strengths:

The newly introduced method proved successful in the quick generation of a TCR transgenic mouse line. Clone selection is based on more comprehensive phenotypical information than traditional methods, providing the opportunity for a more rational T-cell clone selection.

The study provides a software tool for TCR repertoire analysis and its linkage with function.

The findings entail general practical implications in the preclinical study of a potentially very broad range of infectious diseases or vaccination.

A novel SARS-CoV-2 spike-specific TCR transgenic mouse line was generated.

Weaknesses:

The authors present a novel method to develop TCR transgenic mice and overcome the limitations of the more traditional method based on hybridomas.

The authors indicate that they did not intend to directly compare their new method with the traditional hybridoma-based approach. However, such comparison becomes inevitable when the classical method is presented as suboptimal and an alternative approach is introduced to address its limitations. Nevertheless, the explanations provided in their rebuttal have helped clarify their position. The intention behind supplementary figure 1 is to illustrate that a clone that appears suitable using traditional assays may fail to produce a successful TCR transgenic line. This is a valid point that I think should be emphasized more clearly in the manuscript, as it highlights the limitations of the traditional method.

However, the main question that remains is whether the proposed new method will reliably resolve this issue. As previously noted, only one mouse line was generated (successfully) from a single candidate, and the method presented to generate their new TCR transgenic line starts from a more advanced point (a well characterized epitope is already known, and tetramers are available to preselect specific clones). Although this approach likely increases the chances of success, it also limits applicability.

The authors suggest that tetramers are not absolutely necessary to select a clone of interest. Testing this hypothesis would have added value to this manuscript, demonstrating the ability to rapidly generate new TCR transgenic lines in response to emerging pathogens, as outlined in the introduction. They propose that, in such cases, mice could be immunised and expanded clones retested for reactivity. However, it is unclear how this strategy differs from the classic method in increasing the chances of selecting an optimal clone.

Regarding the practical value and cost-effectiveness of extensive expression profiling for T cell clone selection, it remains unclear how well a clone chosen for specific traits will retain these features when developed into a TCR transgenic line, or what traits are ideal for different applications. T cell fate is plastic, and various parameters could influence marker expression.

Issues remain concerning the statistical analysis. Data are said to have been analyzed using both parametric and non-parametric tests. The described approach of performing a normality test followed by either parametric or non-parametric tests is not a correct method for statistical data analysis.

Summary:

The authors seek to use single-cell sequencing approaches to identify TCRs specific for the SARS CoV2 spike protein, select a candidate TCR for cloning and use it to construct a TCR transgenic mouse. The argument is that this process is less cumbersome than the classical approach, which involves the identification of antigen-reactive T cells in vitro and the construction of T cell hybridomas prior to TCR cloning. TCRs identified by single-cell sequencing that is already paired to transcriptomic data would more rapidly identify TCRs that are likely to contribute to a functional response. The authors successfully identify TCRs that have expanded in response to SARS CoV2 spike protein immunization, bind to MHC tetramers and express genes associated with functional response. They then select a TCR for cloning and construction of a transgenic mouse in order to test the response of resulting T cells in vivo following immunization with spike protein of coronavirus infection.

Strengths:

(1) The study provides proof of principle for the identification and characterization of TCRs based on single-cell sequencing data.

(2) The authors employ a recently developed software tool (DALI) that assists in linking transcriptomic data to individual clones.

(3) The authors successfully generate a TCR transgenic animal derived from the most promising T cell clone (CORSET8) using the TCR sequencing approach.

(4) The authors provide initial evidence that CORSET8 T cells undergo activation and proliferation in vivo in response to immunization or infection.

(5) Procedures are well-described and readily reproducible.

Weaknesses:

(1) The purpose of presenting a failed attempt to generate TCR transgenic mice using a traditional TCR hybridoma method is unclear. The reasons for the failure are uncertain, and the inclusion of this data does not really provide information on the likely success rate of the hybridoma vs single cell approach for TCR identification, as only a single example is provided for either.

(2) There is little information provided regarding the functional differentiation of the CORSET8 T cells following challenge in vivo, including expression of molecules associated with effector function, cytokine production, killing activity and formation of memory. The study would be strengthened by some evidence that CORSET8 T cells are successfully recapitulating the functional features of the endogenous immune response (beyond simply proliferating and expressing CD44). This information is important to evaluate whether the presented sequencing-based identification and selection of TCRs is likely to result in T-cell responses that replicate the criteria for selecting the TCR in the first place.

(3) While I find the argument reasonable that the approach presented here has a lot of likely advantages over traditional approaches for generating TCR transgenic animals, the use of TCR sequencing data to identify TCRs for study in variety of areas, including cancer immunotherapy and autoimmunity, is in broad use. While much of this work opts for alternative methods of TCR expression in primary T cells (i.e. CRISPR or retroviral approaches), the process of generating a TCR transgenic mouse from a cloned TCR is not in itself novel. It would be helpful if the authors could provide a more extensive discussion explaining the novelty of their approach for TCR identification in comparison to other more modern approaches, rather than only hybridoma generation.

Comments on revisions:

The authors have provided additional clarification on the comparisons between the presented method for TCR transgenic generation and the hybridoma method that is more commonly used and added additional verification of the functional response in vivo of T cells expressing the selected TCR. Overall, these additions enhance the evidence that the proposed methods are likely to identify TCRs with a strong immune activation profile and are a reasonable response to the first round of review.