In this manuscript, Yong and colleagues link perturbations in lysosomal lipid metabolism with the generation of protein aggregates resulting from proteosome inhibition. The main tool used is the ProteoStat stain to assess protein aggregate burden in native cells (i.e. cells under no exogenous or endogenous stress). They initially use CRISPR-based genome-wide screens to identify several genes that affect this aggregate burden. Interestingly, knockdown of genes involved in lysosomal acidification was a major signature which led to identification of other culprit lysosome-associated genes that included ones involved in lipid metabolism. Subsequent CRISPR screen focused on lipidomic analysis led to identification of sphingolipid and cholesterol esters as lipid classes with effects on proteostasis.

Comments on revised version:

They did a decent job addressing most of my comments and the new data (including LysoIP) makes for much more plausible conclusions.

They propose the idea that microautophagy is mediating the delivery of these aggregates to lysosomes.

It appears there are enough experiments and support now for their premise.

The lysosomal lipid metabolism link to proteostasis is still a lingering question in this work but they addressed each of the points I raised regarding it and revised the manuscript accordingly with pertinent discussion.

It is difficult to truly address the lipid link and I think we have to acknowledge that. But overall, looking at the effort and conclusions, this has been improved enough to be a valuable contribution to the field.

In this paper, starting with unbiased CRISPRi screening, the authors found that perturbations in lipid homeostasis lead to proteostasis impairment. The screen and most follow-up experiments used the dye ProteoStat, which detects protein aggregates and the aggresome. Based upon their screen hits and subsequent analyses, the authors determined that increased levels of sphingolipids and cholesterol esters induce proteostasis defects, along with formation of protein aggregates that appear to be localized in the lysosome. The lysosome increases in content, but its function is not detectably perturbed.

Comments on revised version:

I am satisfied with the authors' actions in response to my public and specific suggestions, but not yet with the manuscript itself. I think that the paper would be improved if they showed the evidence arguing against an effect on proteasome activity but I can live with this omission. I think that the readability and ease of grasping the main points are improved by Figure 7. Inclusion of these simple but informative conceptual summaries is a must.