In the interests of transparency, eLife includes the editorial decision letter and accompanying author responses. A lightly edited version of the letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the most substantive concerns; minor comments are not usually included.

[Editors’ note: a previous version of this study was rejected after peer review, but the authors submitted for reconsideration. The first decision letter after peer review is shown below.]

Thank you for submitting your work entitled "Gene activation by a CRISPR-assistant trans enhancer" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by three peer reviewers, including Irwin Davidson as the Reviewing Editor and Reviewer #1, and the evaluation has been overseen by a Reviewing Editor and a Senior Editor.

Our decision has been reached after consultation between the reviewers. Based on these discussions and the individual reviews below, we regret to inform you that your work will not be considered further for publication in eLife.

While the referees found the concept of tethering an enhancer element in trans as a novel and innovative approach to activate expression of chosen endogenous cellular genes, they were unanimously concerned by the lack of information on the reproducibility of the data, the absence of appropriate statistical tests and important missing controls. The presentation of the data made it difficult to assess the efficiency of the system and the many of the experiments will have to be repeated again and the data presented in a much more rigorous fashion. The referees would encourage the authors to take note of the many suggestions and comments that would have to be addressed in any future manuscript.

Reviewer #1:

This paper describes a novel system to tether an CMV enhancer element in trans to selected regions of the genome using CRISPR/CAS9 allowing the selective activation of chosen target genes. They show that activation by this method is more efficient that CAS9-VP64 and that the two systems can be used cooperatively.

Major issues:

To demonstrate the specificity of the technique, the authors should perform experiments with a version of the CMV enhancer in which key bases have been mutated to impair the binding of transcription factors. This would demonstrate the importance of using a functional enhancer. The authors may also consider experiments using cell-specific enhancers and demonstrating that the system can used in a cell-type specific manner. This is not essential for the message of the paper but may give added value to the study.

In Figure 2 and Figure 3 as well as Figure 2—figure supplement 2, Figure 2—figure supplement 3, Figure 2—figure supplement 4 the results of the ZsGreen assays are absolutely not clear. What are we supposed to compare, how by looking at the figures can we assess the activation in the different conditions? Also, in the text, there are no precise figures given concerning the fold activation in each condition. In Figure 4A, there are only 2 transfections so there are no robust statistics concerning activation. The reasons for assaying ZsGreen rather measuring RNA output directly are not well justified. All of these figures have to be modified such that the reader can readily assess the differences in each experimental condition. RNA should be measured by RT-qPCR and fold changes and statistics from replicate experiments should be provided.

In Figure 5 and Figure 6 the number of biological replicates and the statistical tests used should both be indicated. The text describing these figures is somewhat oversimplified as they claim that activation of HNF4A results in strong induction of liver function genes. In fact, some are strongly induced, but for others the effect is very low and this is not recognised in the text. Statistics should be shown for the cell cycle analyses in Figure 6C number of replicates and statistical test used.

Figure S9. There is no obvious difference in the number of cells in the different conditions. This must be quantitated and analysed to provide reliable statistics.

In summary, while this paper describes an interesting and novel technique, the data as they are presented require additional replicates, statistical test and clearer presentation to be acceptable.

Additional data files and statistical comments:

The number of replicates and the statistical tests used are not indicated and more rigorous analyses have to be performed and present in any revised version. The present version is way below acceptable standards.

Reviewer #2:

Here, Xu et al., describe a transcriptional activation strategy using dCas9-VP64 together with a modified gRNA scaffold (csgRNA) that can anneal to a CMV enhancer DNA sequence (sCMV) provided in trans. They show that dCas9/csgRNA/sCMV (in the absence of a transactivation domain) is capable of inducing transcription of a reporter construct and that the transcriptional activity of the complex is enhanced by the addition of a transactivation domain (VP64) to dCas9 (dCas9-VP64). They also show that transfecting dCas9-VP64/csgRNA/sCMV is capable of inducing transcription of the reporter in 7 different cell lines. They also claim that dCas9-VP64/csgRNA/sCMV is a little bit more efficient that dCas9-VPR in inducing transcription. Finally, they show that dCas9-VP64/csgRNA/sCMV can induce transcription of endogenous genes in two different cancer cell lines and that this can trigger differentiation.

Although the strategy proposed here is original, the sCMV component needs to be provided in trans (co-transfected), therefore application of this system is limited to cells in culture and would be very challenging to use this strategy in vivo.

A major flaw of this study is that transfection efficiency cannot be determined. It is impossible to know the percentage of cells that are expressing dCas9-VP64 and the proportion of these in which transcriptional activation has occurred. Therefore, the transcriptional effect observed is either under- or over-estimated.

There are many variables in the experiment, as 4 constructs need to be co-transfected (reporter, dCas9-VP64, csgRNA and sCMV). The experiments should have been done in a cell line stably transfected with the reporter construct and using a single plasmid co-expressing the csgRNA together with mCherry-dCas9-VP64 (or mCherry-dCas9-VPR). This would not only reduce the number of variables but would allow the authors to: (1) Determine the transfection efficiency and the frequency of mCherry+ cells (expressing dCas9-VP64) in which transcriptional activation has occurred (ZsGreen+) and (2) Determine the transactivation level by scoring the MFI of ZsGreen in the mCherry+ ZsGreen+ population.

The FACS data should be presented as dot plots (FSC vs. ZsGreen). This allows to visualize the ZsGreen+ population, which is not clear at all (given the low percentage of ZsGreen+ cells) from the histograms.

The manuscript is poorly written and is full of strange words and expressions and should be proof-read by an English-speaking person.

Figure legends do not describe the figures and should be re-written. Legend for Figure 1B is missing.

On all FACS data shown, the gating for ZsGreen is not the same throughout (i.e. compare panels in Figure 2).

It is not clear how the MFI intensity in Figure 4 was determined. Therefore, it is impossible to assess the validity of the comparisons.

In Figure 1B, the percentage of cleavage should be displayed, as it is clear that the csgRNA is not as efficient as the unmodified scaffold. Also, the input is missing.

In Figure 5, a negative control without the csgRNA is missing. The relative mRNA induction should be calculated relative to this control, as it would directly show the fold induction triggered by dCas9-VP64/csgRNA/sCMV. Also, the y axis should be labelled relative mRNA (and not RNA) expression.

In the qPCR data shown in Figure 6A and 6B, it is not indicated what was used to determine the relative expression. Same as in Figure 5, the negative control (without the csgRNA) is missing and should be performed in order to determine the relative expression of each gene. Also, the expression level of the target gene should be shown.

For clarity, a diagram of the reporter construct should be shown.

Additional data files and statistical comments:

Throughout the manuscript, it is not clear how many times the experiments were done. For example, the qPCR data shown in Figure 5, do the error bars correspond to technical or biological replicates? Is a representative experiment shown? Also, in several figures it is not indicated which samples are compared when the * is shown for statistical significance.

Reviewer #3:

In their study, Xu et al., developed a novel approach using CRISPR/dCas9 to activate gene expression. They modified the guide RNA scaffold as such that a CMV enhancer DNA fragment was recruited to the target gene by the dCas9-VP64/sgRNA complex. The authors argue that previously published approaches have limitation regarding the strength of transcriptional activation and their approach is superior in this regard.

The approach by Xu et al., is novel and innovative having potential beyond the use case presented in the current study. Based on the data presented I have the following comments/questions.

1) The authors initially validate their approach (Figure 2) in 293T cells by co-transfecting an exogenous GFP-based reporter construct. Transient transfection efficiencies of 293T cells are known to be extremely high. Why does e.g. dCas9-VP64/csgRNA2-sCMV achieve only 11% of GFP+ cells, assuming that >90% of 293T are transfected?

2) Regarding Figure 5 and along the line of my previous comment. How do we have to interpret the fold-changes in expression of endogenous genes having seen that in Figure 2 only a comparably small proportion of cells activated the reporter construct? Based on the methods description, all endogenous gene expression analyses were done using the bulk cell cultures. Are the changes in gene expression seen in the bulk culture caused by extremely high transactivation in a small fraction of cells or by homogenous induction across all cells? At least the first scenario is suggested by the pilot experiments shown in Figure 2. Thus, single cell-based approaches could clarify this for the endogenous target genes, e.g. immunofluorescence/FACS for the proteins encoded by the transactivated target genes.

3) If transcriptional activation is achieved only in a fraction (approximately 10%) of the cells despite high transfection efficiencies, then the approach by Xu et al., would have some limitations, at least for bulk cell culture analyses, in comparison to SAM and other methods, which can be also efficiently delivered to target cells by viruses. Where do the authors then see the advantage of their approach, as the requirement for transient transfection remains a drawback, in particular in cell models that are difficult to transfect?

[Editors’ note: what now follows is the decision letter after the authors submitted for further consideration.]

Thank you for resubmitting your work entitled "Gene activation by a CRISPR-assisted trans enhancer" for further consideration at eLife. Your revised article has been favorably evaluated by Kevin Struhl (Senior Editor), a Reviewing Editor, and two reviewers.

The manuscript has been improved but there are some remaining issues that need to be addressed before acceptance, as outlined below:

In this new version, the authors addressed many of the issues raised on the previous versions. They have provided data on the reproducibility of the results with the appropriate statistics. They have used alternative regulatory elements in place of CMV and they have developed an alternative strategy for recruiting the trans-acting element using the GAL4 DNA binding domain. These new innovations have strengthened the study. However, the paper is now too long with too many figures. The paper would be more appropriate if it was shortened to a Tools and Resources article rather than a full manuscript. This can be done by reorganizing the figures. For example, rather than showing all of the fluorescence images and sorting results, this could all be shown in graphical form as is already the case for Figures 8C, D and E and Figure 9C, D and E. This would save a lot of space and condense all the information into a single figure, showing perhaps a single representative sorting experiment and cell images as supplemental data. Also Figure 5 could be shortened to show only 1 or 2 cell types with the rest shown as supplemental data. I also propose that the data on cell cycle changes and migration be removed to shorten the text. This data is not central to the main message of the paper. On the other hand, supplemental figure 11 should be shown in the main figures possibly as an addition to Figure 1.

Finally, the writing is poor and the meaning of what is written is in several places very difficult to understand. Mitigating this will require a major effort.

The authors are invited to submit a shortened revised version based on the above suggestions.