In the interests of transparency, eLife includes the editorial decision letter and accompanying author responses. A lightly edited version of the letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the most substantive concerns; minor comments are not usually included.

Thank you for submitting your article "Constraints on neural redundancy" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by three peer reviewers, including Eric Shea-Brown as the Reviewing Editor and Reviewer #1, and the evaluation has been overseen by Sabine Kastner as the Senior Editor. The following individual involved in review of your submission has agreed to reveal their identity: Guillaume Hennequin (Reviewer #2).

The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.

Summary:

In this paper, Hennig et al. investigate the structure of output-null activity as recorded during BCI tasks in which these output-null directions are under their experimental control. They go systematically through a series of hypotheses regarding the marginal distributions of population activity along the few relevant output-null directions (contained within a subspace that already accounts for most of the variance in the population activity). These hypotheses are both very clearly articulated (e.g. organised in 3 categories) and their quantitative assessment is thorough. The results argue against hypotheses that null-space neural variability is either uncontrolled or determined by energy constraints (the minimal firing and minimal deviation hypotheses, which are well explained and clearly linked). Rather the work shows that activity in potent and null dimensions is surprisingly coupled, which constrains activity in the redundant dimensions, at least over the hundreds of trials following a switch in the BCI decoder. They accomplish this by exploiting an experimental setup and dataset, previously studied in the context of other relearning questions, where monkeys are first trained to perform a cursor "reach" task and then are trained to perform the same task with a different mapping of activity to response.

The dataset and analyses that the paper uses are highly interesting, and the questions they address about adaptation and function of high-dimensional neural activity are very timely. Manifold perturbations and learning over them via BCI decoders is a setup where clear hypotheses on neural variability and covariability can directly be formulated and tested. The analysis has a high level of complexity but a set of statistical controls are carried out in the supplementary material, as well as in, e.g., Figure 6, to show that the analysis itself is robust. The metrics of histogram error and error floors are well motivated and explained. The writing is very clear and well explained. The hypotheses tested seemed appropriate and were well justified. Despite some concerns about over-interpretation and one about novelty below, these features lend confidence in the authors' results.

Essential revisions:

Several concerns arose about over-interpretation and novelty, as well as data that should be included. These need to be addressed, and are as follows:

A1) Golub et al. (2018), by many of the same authors and using a similar dataset (or perhaps exactly the same dataset; it isn't clear but should be) – is a closely related paper, in which the authors conclude that monkeys continue to produce a fixed set of neural activity patterns when BCI mappings change. In other words, Golub et al., 2018 argues that the same fixed set of activity patterns are reassociated with different BCI outputs. What is the impact of this published result, and the allied covariance analysis in Golub et al., on the a priori viability of the different hypotheses that the authors test in the present paper? For example, it seems consistent with the present fixed distribution hypothesis, but perhaps not with first version of the minimal firing hypothesis? The authors should do a much better job of discussing this and clarifying what the present paper adds – both throughout the paper and in the Discussion – rather than only giving a one sentence mention of Golub 2018 as in the current Discussion.

A2) The authors give no justification for this statement: "To fully utilize the proposed benefits of neural redundancy, there should be as few constraints as possible on which population activity patterns can be produced while leaving the readout unaffected."

Related to this: The authors state that "the output-null space should not be thought of as a space in which neural activity can freely vary to carry out computations that are not reflected in output-potent activity. Instead, the output-potent component of the population activity pattern determines the distribution of the corresponding output-null activity." Do the results support this conclusion? The results affirm that the covariance structure of neurons within the manifold is persistent across their experimental tasks. But does this mean that the null activity is not used for computation or preparation?

A3) The paper is based on a center-out BCI task. However, there were no figures or data included on the behavioral performance. After reading the methods, I saw a paper referenced. It would be nice to include a figure on behavioral performance in the current manuscript, especially given that a third monkey appears to have been added following the previously published paper. It is helpful to the reader to have the behavioral data present in the current paper rather than having to go back to the previous work.

The following points require clarification or rewriting in the main text and/or addition to Discussion:

B1) "Minimal intervention principle" (MIP, in this review) is used to describe a set of alternatives that – for us at least – do not really embody this notion. Here, the authors refer to MIP as the neural activity not moving along directions that do not matter for cursor movement, i.e. output-null directions. This view might stem from the authors considering the cursor to be the "plant", and M1 being the input to the plant. Another, perhaps more brain-centric view of the BCI control problem is to view both M1 and the cursor as the plant under control. After all, the brain needs to control the activity of M1 as part of controlling the cursor. Under this perspective, optimal control with MIP prescribes driving M1 with such minimal inputs as to adequately steer the activity in the directions that matter (output-potent) while being tolerant of fluctuations in output-null directions. Typically, though, such control inputs will generate activity trajectories that visit both subspaces in a coordinated way. For example, it might be that, due to the internal dynamics of M1, the most efficient way of moving its activity along an output-potent direction is to, in fact, make a pronounced excursion along an output-null direction. We are by no means rejecting hypotheses 3-5 as being irrelevant, but we think that MIP might in fact have more in common with hypothesis 6 ("fixed strategy") in that optimal control of a few activity directions is likely to cause correlated activity across potent- and null-directions due to the intrinsic dynamics of the circuit.

B2) Concerning the last hypothesis (fixed distribution), we believe it could be tested using any relevant distribution of activity, not only the one recorded under the "previous mapping"; it seems that all that matters is that you have a "reference distribution" that predicts some degree of coupling/correlations between the two sets of potent/null directions that define the current mapping. This, for example, could be the activity used to define the "intrinsic manifold". Have the authors considered testing this last hypothesis using such prior data? If it explains the structure of output-null activity equally well, this could add to the argument that output-null activity is mainly constrained by the dynamics of the circuit under control. The authors should comment on this, explain how this would fits into the results in the paper as a whole.

Related to this, it seems possible that the motor cortex activity could drive muscle movements, in addition to the BCI cursor. In this case, some of the output null dimensions could actually be related to output potent dimensions, just not for cursor movement. In this case, the so-called redundant or output null dimensions might not actually be redundant. Rather, they would be serving a different purpose, which could explain possible structure in their activity distributions. In this sense, I would not consider these redundant dimensions. Rather, the activity could be driving movements in a higher than 2D space if one considers both the BCI output and muscle movements. It would be helpful to see some description of how the authors have ruled out this possibility or why they have considered it to be a non-significant issue.

B3) Are the authors confident that, following a switch in the decoder, the animal has enough time with the new decoder for any expected null space changes to occur? The trial count into the hundreds does seem substantial, so this is not a big concern, though the authors might wish to comment on how long the animal had with the new decoder (especially whether this was over one or multiple sessions/days), in relationship to timescales of plasticity and expected changes in activity, in the Discussion.

B4) The BCI case is quite nice for studying this type of question. However, the dimensionality of the neural population controlling the BCI output is rather limited compared to perhaps a natural case of an entire motor cortical region capable of controlling a set of muscles. Dimensionality seems like it should play a significant role in considerations of redundancy, both on the neural end and the output end. It would be helpful to see more analysis or discussion of how neural and behavioral dimensionality, and perhaps most significantly the difference between the two, could play a role in interpretation and analysis of redundancy. For example, intuitively it seems possible that redundancy might be less constrained if 10,000 electrodes were used for BCI rather than 96. Is this true?

B5) The authors limit their analysis to the in-manifold perturbations of their experiment. The dataset has also out-of-manifold perturbations. Some comments on what is to be expected here seem worth mentioning in the Discussion.