In the interests of transparency, eLife includes the editorial decision letter and accompanying author responses. A lightly edited version of the letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the most substantive concerns; minor comments are not usually included.

Thank you for submitting your article "Inferring multi-scale neural mechanisms with brain network modelling" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been favorably evaluated by David Van Essen (Senior Editor) and three reviewers, one of whom, Charles E. Schroeder (Reviewer #1), is a member of our Board of Reviewing Editors. The following individual involved in review of your submission has agreed to reveal their identity: Karl J Friston (Reviewer #2).

The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.

Summary:

The authors introduce a novel connectome-based brain network model that in their view integrates structural and functional data from individuals with neural population dynamics to enable what they term "multi-scale neurophysiological inference." The most novel feature is that in-silico populations are linked together by empirically derived structural connectivity and driven by electroencephalography (EEG) source activity (i.e., the source activity functions. The authors report that simulations predicted subjects' individual resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) time series and spatial network topologies over 20 minutes of activity, but more importantly, they also revealed precise neurophysiological mechanisms that underlie and link observations from multiple scales and measurement domains including a) r-fMRI oscillations, b) topographies of macroscopic FC networks, c) E/I balance at a more cellular level, d) α-related "pulsed inhibition" and e) power-law scaling in fMRI. The authors offer the model as a potential solution to bridging the gap between temporal/spatial scales and measurement domains. The strengths of the paper include the fact that the simulations predicted the fMRI time series better than other control scenarios. The use of EEG derived temporal functions to drive the models seems a good step in the direction of biological plausibility. Interestingly, the authors observed several neurophysiological phenomena that were produced by the model. The analysis seems to be solid and rigorous. However, since there were many details in each analysis, the organization of the manuscript and the description and motivation of each step could be improved.

Essential revisions:

1) The idea to inject empirical data into a biophysical model is very appealing, although there is a logical conundrum. The model itself (without IBG, the EEG currents) is already internally consistent – i.e. even without the injected EEG data, it can predict both EEG (through EPSP-related currents Ii(E), Equation (1)) and bold, through convolution of the same with the HRF. But here, the empirical data is already used as part of the input to the pyramidal cells. That is, the currents Ii(E)of Equation (1) are composed, by construction of the self-consistent feedback from other parts of the modelled system plus the actual behaviour of the system IBG. As soon as the system itself exhibits some internally generated behaviour (which it seems to), then the model currents Ii(E)receive inputs from other regions and can no longer predict the EEG which is now just part of the input to the RHS of Equation (1) – i.e. the model loses self-consistency. Part of the circularity arises when comparing the predicted EEG from Ii(E) with the actual EEG IBG, clearly already a subcomponent of the system. Notably, only when the coupling is turned off (subsection “Long-range coupling controls fMRI power-law scaling”, second paragraph) does the PSD of the model match the PSD of the EEG data.

Similarly, the EEG data are themselves already generated by a highly-integrated system (i.e. the brain) and there is thus a similar circularity between its biological generation, and then the apparent additional contributions from the model. That is, whether you start with the model and add EEG, or start with EEG and add model, either is contradictory because they're meant to be the same thing.

The only other alternative, is that the model itself essentially does nothing, in which case, its own contributions to Ii(E) are negligible so that Ii(E)IBG. This could arise if the inputs drive essentially strong inhibitory activity, damping the behaviour of the system such that all of the activity is essentially driven by IBG. This is partly supported by the biggest match with data occurring for increasing wBG(I), Figure 3A – i.e. the drive to the inhibitory population favouring a strong EEG input. Although self-consistency would be approximated in this setting, this would be essentially a trivial undertaking. Regardless, Figures 5–6 suggest this is not the case – i.e. the model is driven away from damped fixed point.

What is the ratio of the model terms on the RHS of Equation (1) to wBG(E)IBG?

Note: in discussion, this emerged as the largest single concern, and the onus lies on the authors resolve this apparent logical inconsistency.

2) It seems highly unlikely that the "standard model" driven by random fluctuations has any chance of yielding time series that correlate with the actual BOLD correlations – even if it is a really good model of the brain, i.e. with accurate parameters etc., it is driven by completely random inputs – how could these yield accurate time-resolved BOLD fluctuations? If this is the criteria by which a goodness of fit is being evaluated, then an alternative inversion scheme, such as dynamic expectation maximization or generalized particle filtering [1] – which can infer the true hidden stochastic inputs – should have been employed. Otherwise it is no wonder that the correlations are close to zero. To some extent, the same also goes for the permutation model which is given the wrong driving inputs, even if they are presumably correlated with the actual source reconstructed data for each region. When it comes to the static (time averaged) functional connectivity, Figure 4, the permutation and noise models perform reasonably well – this being pertinent because the noise model has far fewer parameters and the comparison, based on linear correlations and not model likelihood, carries no complexity penalty (as it ideally should).

3) Although the fitting of the PSD is state-of-the art, a linear fit across one order of magnitude is not sufficient evidence of scale-free dynamics (subsection “Long-range coupling controls fMRI power-law scaling”, first paragraph) which typically require broader scaling and may be better studied by measuring the distribution of fluctuations in the time domain. In the PSD, power law requires a particular slope (the noise becomes white when the slope becomes shallow). Criticality really requires analysis for a critical transition when tuning a model parameter. The slope is still a useful measure of model performance but the language around it should be curtailed.

4) In what dynamical regime is the simulated neural mass model? Is it near-to-criticality (as confirmed by analysis of the effective Jacobian) as per some of the authors' prior work. If so, what is the nature of the bifurcation? Shouldn't the injected noise (in the noise model) have the same autocorrelation as the source EEG data to allow like with like? I feel there is a lot of back literature on this model (e.g. by Wang) as well as neural mass dynamics in general that would improve the contextualization of the paper.

5) What is the motivation for choosing the "best" model as the one that best "converts" the EEG input to an fMRI output? On first thought, that makes complete sense but this is not what the brain is trying to do (?).… can we still observe the neurophysiological phenomenon if the selected parameters weren't the ones that showed the highest correlation with the fMRI? Perhaps using the model with a cognitive task might be informative and also provide some details about behavioral performance.

6) Level at which the paper is presented: On one hand, there seems to be an attempt to present this at a level appropriate for the broad readership of eLife. On the other hand, it seems that in many cases the descriptions lack precision and technical terms seem to be used freely with no attempt to introduce them. There are lots of repetitions in the text e.g., "Individualized hybrid models yielded predictions of ongoing empirical subject-specific resting-state fMRI time series." Figures are graphically nice but captions are messy; also, there is a loose relation between what they refer to in the text and what you see in figures). Introduction is more of an extended Abstract.

7) The hybrid model as presently constructed is specifically tied to α oscillatory dynamics. This could be a limitation, as α, though prominent, is different in many ways from other oscillatory regimes, and α is certainly not dominant at all times. In fact, it may be best thought of as one of several modes of brain operation, even in a system that is for lack of a better description, at "rest."

8) Regarding clarifying the presentation – The three issues you should emphasise could be summarised by inserting something like the following in the Introduction: "In summary, our biophysically grounded (whole brain) model has the potential to test mechanistic hypotheses about emergent phenomena such as scale-free dynamics, the crucial role of excitation-inhibition balance, the haemodynamic correlates of α activity etc. However, there is another perspective on this form of hybrid modelling. Because it uses empirical EEG data to generate predictions of fMRI responses, it can be regarded as a form of multimodal fusion; under a forward or generative model that is both physiologically and anatomically grounded. In addition, because we use connectivity constraints based on tractography, it also serves to fuse structural with functional data."

In the Discussion something like this might help: "Clearly, the sequence of analyses and implicit hypothesis testing presented in this paper represents one of many lines of enquiry. The more general point made by this report is that our hybrid model can be used to both test hypotheses and to build hypotheses. In other words, many of the questions (for which we offer answers) only emerged during application of the model – an application that allowed us to pursue a particular narrative in understanding the genesis of scale free dynamics in the human brain."

The third point should be addressed after the discussion about scale invariant dynamics (Discussion, seventh paragraph). I would recommend something like: "Note that we have used the hybrid model not simply to establish the prevalence of scale invariant dynamics – but to use the power law scaling in a quantitative sense to understand the mechanisms leading to particular power law exponents; for example, the importance of extrinsic (between node) connections in explaining the differences between power law scaling at the electrophysiological and haemodynamic level. This is an important point because scale-free behaviour per se would be difficult to avoid in simulations of this sort."

9) The captions are unwieldly and difficult to track. they should be shortened and edited to describe what is in the figure at hand. Some of the captions, particularly the first few, are quite lengthy, with references, editorializing and even discussion.

[Editors' note: further revisions were requested prior to acceptance, as described below.]

Thank you for resubmitting your work entitled "Inferring multi-scale neural mechanisms with brain network modelling" for further consideration at eLife. Your revised article has been favorably evaluated by David Van Essen (Senior Editor), a Reviewing Editor, and a reviewer.

The manuscript has been improved but there are five remaining issues that need to be addressed before acceptance, as outlined below:

1) Self-consistency/causal circularity: yes I agree that injecting EEG as an input current is a great idea (as I did before) unless one is actually predicting that EEG. Finding a less than perfect correlation because the predicted EEG also have local currents on top of the actual injected EEG really just underlines the conceptual issue.

2) The rather unlikely comparisons of the actual (time resolved) fMRI using the actual (time resolved) EEG as an input compared to using time permuted EEG or white noise is still an odd thing to do, whether it's a formal model comparison or an "informal" one. Comparing the moments of the data would be fine. I guess it just shows that "something is working".

3) Since the authors have qualified that their model is focused on the α rhythm, it would be nice if they qualified how it contrasts with the bimodal/bistable corticothalamic neural field model of Freyer et al. (2009,2011) since this has been previously shown to substantially constrain model space (and is a clear feature of the α rhythm not addressed here, but could be done in future work.

Note – Two additional points of concern were triggered by the following passage and resulting revisions of the manuscript text: Both, the approximation of EPSCs on the basis of EEG, and the prediction of EEG on the basis of EPSCs, are in accordance with empirical and theoretical results that identify EPSCs as the major generators of EEG (Buzsáki et al., 2012; Kirschstein and Köhling, 2009; Mitzdorf, 1985). Although EEG reflects the total sum of all extracellular currents, "large cortical pyramidal neurons in deep cortical layers play a major role in the generation of the EEG" and, more importantly, "excitatory postsynaptic potentials predominate as generators of the EEG waves", since "CI- and K+ as main charge carriers of the IPSP have a smaller electrochemical gradient than Na+ and Ca2+ (the charge carriers of the EPSP)" (Kirschstein and Köhling, 2009), while IPSPs do not contribute significantly to current source densities(Mitzdorf, 1985).

4) First – regarding the proposition (Mitzdorf, 1985) that you can basically ignore the IPSP as a contributor to local CSD profile (and to the EEG): theoretical considerations notwithstanding, the literature on CSD in nonhuman has repeatedly presented empirical observations that are exceptions to this proposition [for an early review addressing ERP generators, see (Schroeder et al., 1995)]. Also the CSD correlates of entrainment (Lakatos et al., 2008; Lakatos et al., 2013) clearly reflect temporal alternation of states dominated by net ensemble depolarization and hyperpolarization (part of which reflects IPSCs), both of which clearly impact the CSD profile and are associated fluctuations in neuronal firing.

5) Second – regarding the role of the large deep (Layer 5) pyramids in the EEG: it does seem that particular large Layer 5 cells like intrinsic burst neurons are critical to the orchestration of oscillations [e.g., (Carracedo et al., 2013; Vijayan et al., 2015; Sherman et al., 2016)]. However, the papers that have examined the laminar CSD profiles associated with δ, theta and α oscillations (Lakatos et al., 2005; Bollimunta et al., 2008; Bollimunta et al., 2011; Haegens et al., 2015) generally show that while all the layers are involved in generating EEG oscillations, the largest generator currents are in the supragranular layers. The layer 5 pyramids to have apical dendrites there, but the majority of the synapses in the supra layers are on supragranular pyramids.

On the other hand, the reviewers agree is a tremendous amount of work in this paper and, that despite these concerns, the balance is strongly positive.