In the interests of transparency, eLife includes the editorial decision letter and accompanying author responses. A lightly edited version of the letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the most substantive concerns; minor comments are not usually included.

Thank you for submitting your article "Damage-induced reactive oxygen species regulates vimentin and dynamic collagen-based projections to mediate wound repair" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by two peer reviewers, and the evaluation has been overseen by Fiona Watt as the Senior and Reviewing Editor. The following individual involved in review of your submission has agreed to reveal his identity: Victoriano Mulero (Reviewer #1).

The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.

Summary:

This study reports the generation of a vimentin reporter zebrafish line to study in vivo, in real time, EMT during wound repair. Pharmacological inhibition studies show that vimentin activation in the wound is downstream of ROS and NFkB. Genetic experiments show that vimentin is required for regeneration and vim+ cells are associated with, and required for, extension of collagen fibers. Finally, disruption of collagen fibers by impairing their crosslinking or in a new burn-wounding model impairs healing. The study is well performed and provides new insights into the role of vimentin in the healing process.

Major points:

1) The morpholino activity is not sufficiently validated in comparison with the CRISPR-Cas9 mutant. The reviewers are not suggesting that the authors should repeat all the experiments using the mutant; however, additional validation of the morpholino effects would strengthen the work significantly.

2) Figures 2 and Figure 2—figure supplement 1: although the pictures and Video 1 show that epithelial (krt4+) and mesenchymal (vim+) cells do not colocalize in the wound edge, the video should be performed in krt4:tom;vim:gfp larvae to confirm that keratinocytes do not show EMT. In addition, the authors should use a genetic inhibition approach, at least for ROS, to confirm the results, since DPI is not specific and side effects are expected at the high concentration used. Imaging of ROS and NFkB using appropriate reporters may also reveal if these signals are intrinsically required by cells activating vimentin in the wound.

3) Figures 4, 6, Figure 4—figure supplement 1, Figure 5—figure supplement 1 and Figure 6—figure supplement 1: as in point 2, genetic inhibition and reporters would be very informative.

4) Figure 7: these results show that collagen fiber disruption impairs regeneration. However, the link between these results and the main finding of the study, i.e. the role of vimentin in wound healing, is not clear. It would be valuable to use the vimentin reporter here.
