In the interests of transparency, eLife publishes the most substantive revision requests and the accompanying author responses.

Acceptance summary:

We are particularly excited about the findings that Alexander Disease-causing mutations perturb key post-translational modifications (PTMs) on GFAP. The selective phosphorylation of GFAP-Ser13 in patients who died young raises the hypothesis that Ser13 phosphorylation and increased GFAP proteolysis by caspase-6 facilitated GFAP aggregation, which leads to disease state.

Decision letter after peer review:

Thank you for submitting your article "Phosphorylation-dependent proteolysis perturbs GFAP proteostasis, implicating caspase-6 in early onset Alexander Disease" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by three peer reviewers, and the evaluation has been overseen by a Reviewing Editor and Huda Zoghbi as the Senior Editor. The following individuals involved in review of your submission have agreed to reveal their identity: W Christopher Risher (Reviewer #2).

The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.

Summary:

Battaglia and co-authors have identified a posttranslational modification of the GFAP protein and potential mechanism involving caspase-6 that appear to correlate with disease severity in the rare but lethal disorder Alexander disease (AxD). In this report post-mortem samples from individuals with known GFAP mutations were analyzed for GFAP-PTM by mass spectrometry. Phospho-Ser13 was identified primarily in samples from AxD patients with early onset, regardless of the mutational variant. Subsequent transfection experiments with Ser13 phospho- and de-phospho mimics further suggest that Ser13 phosphorylation promotes protein aggregation. In addition, the authors show that pSer13-GFAP along with caspase-6 localize to aggregates found in astrocytes derived from AxD iPSCs, and that the phospho-mimic S13D leads to caspase-6 cleavage of GFAP, similar to AxD mutations. Finally, they show that pSer13, caspase-6 protein, and caspase-6 cleaved GFAP are present in brains from early onset AxD patients.

Essential revisions:

All three reviewers found the question interesting and the results potentially significant.

1) The major critique from all three reviewers is that the causality between phosphorylation of GFAP and cleavage of caspase-6 in relation to the pathology of AxD are not explored. For example, does blocking phosphorylation of this site on GFAP in the patient iPSC astrocytes prevent/reverse the GFAP aggregation and perinuclear accumulation of GFAP? Are there known effects on astrocyte health/reactivity in addition to GFAP aggregation that can be monitored, to see if they are also rescued? Experiments along these lines would greatly strengthen the study.

Specific comments along this line include "The key pieces of evidence suggesting cause and effect are the transfection experiments with phopho-mimetic constructs. Although N-terminal substitutions are rare in AxD, how do we know that the S13D mutation does not cause GFAP aggregation in itself (multiple AxD associated mutations have been identified at Ser385, 393 and 398)? Did the authors try other substitutions, e.g. S13V, S13E (or D225E to prevent caspase-6 cleavage)? Since it is known that over-expression of wild-type GFAP causes aggregation, how are GFAP expression levels controlled between transfections? If phosphorylation of GFAP-Ser13 promotes caspase-6 cleavage and GFAP aggregation, shouldn't elimination of pSer13 alleviate aggregate formation in the R79H/S13A transfection? Would caspase-6 inhibitors (Ac-VEID-CHO) prevent aggregation in either the SW13vim-cells or iPSC astrocytes? The authors claim in the Discussion that impairment of GFAP assembly by the S13D phospho-mimic is due to caspase-6 cleavage, but this link is not demonstrated by the data shown. "

2) The Western blots in the figures (Figure 3E, Figure 6B, Figure 7B) used Coomassie staining as the loading control, but no details were given. Given that antibody labeling of Coomassie-stained gels is notoriously difficult, did the authors use different gels for determining protein amounts vs. blotting? This would not be an appropriate normalization method for the actual blotted membranes, and would therefore need to be replaced. If these Coomassie controls were done on the same gels that went on to be blotted for antibodies, please provide technical details in the Materials and methods, as this is a non-standard approach.

[Editors' note: further revisions were requested prior to acceptance, as described below.]

Thank you for resubmitting your work entitled "Phosphorylation-dependent proteolysis perturbs GFAP proteostasis, implicating caspase-6 in early onset Alexander Disease" for further consideration at eLife. Your revised article has been favorably evaluated by Huda Zoghbi (Senior Editor), a Reviewing Editor, and three reviewers.

The reviewers agreed that the manuscript has been improved and is a strong candidate for eLife, but there are some remaining issues that need to be addressed before acceptance, as outlined below:

The main remaining issue is on how strong the conclusions can be drawn. Please make modifications to the text and potentially to the title to reflect the concerns of reviewer 3.

Reviewer #1:

The authors have added a number of new experiments to the paper that strengthen the conclusion linking phosphorylation of GFAP to caspase-6 cleavage of GFAP and to the pathology of Alexander disease. While major point 1 is not fully addressed (determining whether these changes are a cause or a consequence of more severe disease mutations), the paper does make significant new findings in the area of Alexander disease that warrant publication in eLife.

Reviewer #2:

The authors have satisfactorily addressed all of my major and minor concerns; I have no further issues. Additionally, the mechanistic insight provided by the new experiments and analyses has significantly elevated the impact of the study.

Reviewer #3:

The authors have made a significant effort in adding important data to address the reviewers' concerns and questions. These include in vitro assembly analysis for the GFAP S13D phospho-mimic, the addition of the S13E phospho-mimic and analysis of GFAP-R79H phosphorylation sites in transfection experiments (SW13vim-), and both genetic and pharmacological inhibition of caspase-6 to assess the effects of GFAP cleavage on protein aggregation in SW13vim- cells. Important controls were also added for the iPS cell and AxD patient experiments. Most of these additions have strengthened the manuscript and support a connection between GFAP phosphorylation and aggregation. However, the new data showing caspase-6 inhibition in itself disrupts GFAP filament organization and fails to rescue S13D aggregation complicate interpretation of the results, and evidence for direct cause and effect between caspase-6 GFAP cleavage and protein aggregation is still lacking. The findings in this report are important in identifying PTMs as new markers of disease severity and should be published, but as noted in the original review, the authors should be more conservative with their conclusions.

The authors indicate a direct link between GFAP-pSer13, caspase-6 cleavage, and protein aggregation in the title, Introduction and Discussion. A major question is still whether the observed phenomena contribute to disease severity or are downstream in the stress response and simply reflect the more severe pathology in early onset AxD. The following 3 areas contribute to this concern:

1) In agreement with a more severe phenotype and astrocyte response, GFAP levels are higher in early onset AxD cases compared to those with late onset (Figure 9D). GFAP has been shown to be phosphorylated in reactive gliosis associated with certain injury models (Takemura et al., 2002), and the overall damage response could have a broader effect in activating caspase-6; p53 for example is activated in AxD (Wang et al., 2015) and is known to transactivate caspase-6 (MacLachlan and El-Deiry, 2002). The authors hypothesize that GFAP phosphorylation directly affects caspase-6 accessibility, but aggregation of GFAP-S13D and S13E in SW13vim- cells likely causes a cellular stress response that could also indirectly activate caspase-6. While I agree with the authors that investigating these mechanisms is beyond the scope of the current manuscript, they should address this possibility in their discussion and conclusions.

2) New experiments to inhibit caspase-6 cleavage of GFAP produce ambiguous results. Inhibition of caspase-6 alone leads to GFAP bundling in SW13vim- cells and in combination with the S13D phospho-mimic, aggregates are not resolved. Western analysis shows clearance of a 100 kD (hmm) band, but a ~200 kD band remains and no western data is shown to demonstrate the level of WT-GFAP oligomerization induced by caspase-6 inhibition. As the authors suggest in the discussion, the role of caspase-6 activation is complex and may also be involved in cytoskeletal reorganization.

3) The supplemental data added to Figure 7 introduce important evidence for a link between GFAP phosphorylation, aggregation and caspase-6 cleavage. Immunoblotting shows de-phospho-mimics of serine residues (S to A) within the S13-S17 motif of mutant R79H GFAP eliminate high molecular weight oligomerization and significantly reduce caspase-6 cleavage fragments. However, these data are complicated by the limited contribution of pSer13 in GFAP-R79H aggregation in SW13vim- cells and the more dominant effects of pS16 and pS17, which have not been otherwise explored in this report. Although the SW13vim- cell line is commonly used to test the effects of GFAP mutation, these results demonstrate the limitations of the system for these experiments. Future work should include similar experiments in the iPSC derived astrocytes.