In this study, the authors explored how the reduced growth fitness, resulting from genome reduction, can be compensated through evolution. They conducted an evolution experiment with a strain of Escherichia coli that carried a reduced genome, over approximately 1,000 generations. The authors carried out sequencing, and found no clear genetic signatures of evolution across replicate populations. They carry out transcriptomics and a series of analyses that lead them to conclude that there are divergent mechanisms at play in individual evolutionary lineages. The authors used gene network reconstruction to identify three gene modules functionally differentiated, correlating with changes in growth fitness, genome mutation, and gene expression, respectively, due to evolutionary changes in the reduced genome.

I think that this study addresses an interesting question. Many microbial evolution experiments evolve by loss of function mutations, but presumably a cell that has already lost so much of its genome needs to find other mechanisms to adapt. Experiments like this have the potential to study "constructive" rather than "destructive" evolution.

Comments on revised version:

I think the authors have carefully gone through the manuscript and addressed all of my concerns.

This manuscript describes an adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) study with a previously constructed genome-reduced E. coli. The growth performance of the end-point lineages evolved in M63 medium was comparable to the full-length wild-type level at lower cell densities.

Subsequent mutation profiling and RNA-Seq analysis revealed many changes on the genome and transcriptomes of the evolved lineages. The authors did a great deal on analyzing the patterns of evolutionary changes between independent lineages, such as the chromosomal periodicity of transcriptomes, pathway enrichment analysis, weight gene co-expression analysis, and so on. They observed a striking diversity in the molecular characteristics amongst the evolved lineages, which, as they suggest, reflect divergent evolutionary strategies adopted by the genome-reduced organism.

As for the overall quality of the manuscript, I am rather torn. The manuscript leans towards elaborating observed findings, rather than explaining their biological significance. For this reason, readers are left with more questions than answers. For example, fitness assay on reconstituted (single and combinatorial) mutants was not performed, nor any supporting evidence on the proposed contributions of each mutants provided. This leaves the nature of mutations - be them beneficial, neutral or deleterious, the presence of epistatic interactions, and the magnitude of fitness contribution, largely elusive. Also, it is difficult to tell whether the RNA-Seq analysis in this study managed to draw biologically meaningful conclusions, or instill insight into the nature of genome-reduced bacteria. The analysis primarily highlighted the differences in transcriptome profiles among each lineage based on metrics such as 'DEG counts' and the 'GO enrichment'. However, I could not see any specific implications regarding the biology of the evolved minimal genome drawn. In their concluding remark, 'Multiple evolutionary paths for the reduced genome to improve growth fitness were likely all roads leading to Rome,' the authors observed the first half of the sentence, but the distinctive characteristics of 'all roads' or 'evolutionary paths', which I think should have been the key aspect in this investigation, remains elusive.

Comments on revised version:

I appreciate the author's responses. They responded to most of the comments, but I still think that there is room for improvement. Please refer to the following comments. Quoted below are the author's responses.

"We agree that our study leaned towards elaborating observed findings rather than explaining the detailed biological mechanisms."

- Comment: I doubt if there are scientific merits in merely elaborating observed findings. The conclusion of this study suggests that evolutionary paths in reduced genomes are highly diverse. But if you think about the nature of adaptive evolution, which relies upon the spontaneous mutation event followed by selection, certain degree of divergence is always expected. The problem with current experimental setting is that there are no ways to quantitively assess whether the degree of evolutionary divergence increases as the function of genome reduction, as the authors claimed. In addition, this notion is in direct contradiction to the prediction that genome reduction constraints evolution by reducing the number of solution space. It is more logical to think and predict that genome reduction would, in turn, lead to the loss of evolutionary divergence. We are also interested to know whether solution space to the optimization problem altered in response to the genome reduction. In this regard, a control ALE experiment on non-reduced wild-type seems to be a mandatory experimental control. I highly suggest that authors present a control experiment, as it was done for "JCVI syn3.0B vs non-minimal M. mycoides" (doi: 10.1038/s41586 023 06288 x) and "E. coli eMS57 vs MG1655" (doi: 10.1038/s41467 019 08888 6).

"We focused on the genome wide biological features rather than the specific biological functions."

- Comment: The 'biological features' delivered in current manuscript does not give insight as to which genomic changes translated into strain fitness improvement. Rather than explaining the genotype-phenotype relationships and/or the mechanistic basis of fitness improvement, authors merely elaborated on the observed phenotypes. I question the scientific merits of such 'findings'.

"Although the reduced growth rate caused by genome reduction could be recovered by experimental evolution, it remains unclear whether such an evolutionary improvement in growth fitness was a general feature of the reduced genome and how the genome wide changes occurred to match the growth fitness increase."

- Comment: This response is very confusing to understand. "it remains unclear whether such an evolutionary improvement in growth fitness was a general feature of the reduced genome" - what aspects remain unclear?? What assumption led the authors to believe that reduced genome's fitness cannot be evolutionarily improved?

- Comment: "and how the genome wide changes occurred to match the growth fitness increase" - this is exactly the aspect that authors should deliver, instead of just elaborating the observed findings. Why don't authors select one or two fastest-growing (or the fittest) lineages and specifically analyze underlying adaptive changes (i.e. genotype-phenotype relationships)?

Summary:

Studying evolutionary trajectories provides important insight in genetic architecture of adaptation and provide potential contribution to evaluating the predictability (or unpredictability) in biological processes involving adaptation. While many papers in the field address adaptation to environmental challenges, the number of studies on how genomic contexts, such as large-scale variation, can impact evolutionary outcomes adaptation is relatively low. This research experimentally evolved a genome-reduced strain for ~1000 generations with 9 replicates and dissected their evolutionary changes. Using the fitness assay of OD measurement, the authors claimed there is a general trend of increasing growth rate and decreasing carrying capacity, despite a positive correlation among all replicates. The authors also performed genomic and transcriptomic research at the end of experimental evolution, claiming the dissimilarity in the evolution at the molecular level.

Strengths:

The experimental evolution approach with a high number of replicates provides a good way to reveal the generality/diversity of the evolutionary routes.

The assay of fitness, genome, and transcriptome all together allows a more thorough understanding of the evolutionary scenarios and genetic mechanisms.

Comments on revised version:

#5 in the last round of comments: When the authors mentioned no overlapping in single mutation level, I thought the authors would directly use this statement to support their next sentence about no bias of these mutations. As the author's responded, I was suspecting no overlapping for 65 mutation across the entire genome is likely to be not statistically significant. In the revised version, the authors emphasized and specified their simulation and argument in the following sentences, so I do not have questions on this point anymore.

#14 in the last round of comments: As what authors responded, "short-term responses" meant transcriptional or physiological changes within a few hours after environmental or genetic fluctuation. "long-term responses" involve new compensatory mutations and selection. The point was that, the authors found that "the transcriptome reorganization for fitness increase triggered by evolution differed from that for fitness decrease caused by genome reduction." That is short vs long-term responses to genetic perturbation. Some other experimental evolution did short vs long-term responses to environmental perturbation and usually also found that the short-term responses are reverted in the long-term responses (e.g., https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/33/1/25/2579742). I hope this explanation makes more sense. And I think the authors can make their own decisions on whether they would like to add this discussion or not.