Our editorial process produces two outputs: i) public reviews designed to be posted alongside the preprint for the benefit of readers; ii) feedback on the manuscript for the authors, including requests for revisions, shown below. We also include an acceptance summary that explains what the editors found interesting or important about the work.

Decision letter after peer review:

Thank you for submitting your article "The single-cell chromatin accessibility landscape in mammalian perinatal testis development" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by 2 peer reviewers, and the evaluation has been overseen by a Reviewing Editor and Marianne Bronner as the Senior Editor. The reviewers have opted to remain anonymous.

The reviewers have discussed their reviews with one another, and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this to help you prepare a revised submission.

Essential revisions:

Overall, the two external experts agreed that this study may offer new and exciting insights into the cell populations that support spermatogenesis at birth. However, because the scATAC-seq was performed on a single replicate, there is no statistical power to support the strength of the main findings, i.e. the identification of novel cell types. Therefore, there is a important need for independent validation.

Please refer to the two points expanded below to prepare your revisions, and please consult the detailed points raised by the reviewers, for further corrections or analytical additions, rephrasing of the manuscript and support for discussion in a point-by-point rebuttal.

1) The quality of immunofluorescence data is not optimal and the validation results often often inconclusive. Better independent validation is needed to support the identification of novel populations by scATAC-seq, a point that was raised by the two reviewers. The results that NR5A1 may mark germ cells that commit to spermatogenesis in an SSC-independent manner are intriguing. However, whole-mount immunostaining provided in Figure 4E is not convincing. Clear colocalization between NR5A1 and germ cell markers should be provided, by cell cytometry and/or IF on sections. Clearer validation that Sertoli stem cells were identified is also needed, the whole-mount staining in Figure 5F being poorly informative. Reviewer #1 provides useful suggestions to make progress on that manner. Reviewer #2 also requests additional analysis to support this identification.

2) One limitation of the study is to correlate scATAC-seq profiles generated here with scRNA-seq data available in the literature and obtained on cell populations that may not be defined according to the same experimental and analytical tools. It is not requested here to perform multiomics on the same cells, but this limitation should be acknowledged. The other limitation comes from using correlation between the presence of TF binding sites at open chromatin sites and gene expression of nearby genes, without proper experimental assignment of regulatory sequences with gene promoters by 3D assays. This experiment would be very difficult to carry on in this developmental and cellular context. Nonetheless, this limitation should also be acknowledged.

3) Replace "mammalian" with "mouse" in the title.

Reviewer #1 (Recommendations for the authors):

In supplemental figure 2 – projecting the dividual datasets will help the reader evaluate the contribution of the individual datasets to each cluster.

A summary stat's table about individual cell quality metrics would be helpful. please detail inclusion / exclusion criteria # peaks per cell etc…

The alignment of scRNAseq clusters with scATACseq was missing in S2D.

What is a deviation score in Figure S3B? Is this the same as a correlation?

EMT in germ cells has also been previously described in http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/29/21/2312

Based on the text and figures for supplemental figure 11 it is hard to fully appreciate the stromal/myoid cell heterogeneity. The authors identify 10 clusters – PC2 appears to be called out as a TCf21 and telocyte population – is this correct? Are these the same the same population but classified differently?

This paper by Liao et al. aims to understand the genetic networks that underlie or modulate gonadogenesis and germ cell maturation during the fetal to neonatal transition. This goal was achieved by performing scATACseq on multiple timepoints (E18.5 and Postnatal days 1,2,5). Clustering of thousands of cells has revealed striking cellular diversity and led to the identification of additional novel populations. This is an exciting paper that may have far reaching implications, but additional validation is needed for novel populations identified.

Reviewer #2 (Recommendations for the authors):

1) It appears that for each time point, only one sample was analyzed, meaning that there was no statistical power to discern whether the outcome is a random observation or true reflection of a biological event. If having statistically meaning sample size is impossible, a duplication of samples should have been done at least to exclude potential technical deviation. In addition, it is not clear whether for each sample, it is a pool of several testes or a single testis.

2) One concern is the lack of details and reference gene lists for making correlations between the published single cell RNAseq dataset from Tan et al. and the single cell ATACseq dataset from this study. This is the critical first step to validate the scATACseq results and assign cell identities. Only one gene per cell type was given as an example.

3) Sertoli and Leydig cells are distinct cell types in terms of their functions and transcriptional profiles. However, the scATACseq dataset did not detect cell specific TF binding profile (Figure 2C). This is quite puzzling.

4) The presence of TF binding sites in the open chromatin region is a suggestion, not a confirmation of TF activity. The authors are advised to make clarification on this matter and tone down the language on such correlation without further validation like ChIP-seq. For example, in Figure 2H, SOX9 binding motifs are enriched in both Sertoli and germ cell cluster but its expression is absent in the germ cells. Similarly, TCF21 motifs and gene expression are enriched in a specific cluster of stromal cells but TCF21 gene activity is not different from other cell type. It is not clear how authors reconcile these conflict findings.

5) Making correlation between separated scATACseq data and scRNAseq data has its limitation. One still cannot be certain that the cell from scATACseq is the same as the one from scRNAseq. This is the major limitation of this study.

6) Similarly, the chromatin interaction (Figure 3A-F) is based on correlation between open chromatin and gene expression. Without confirmation of 3C and High C analyses, the results are strictly speculative.

7) Some of the figures are difficult to follow with insufficient description of how the experiments were conducted. For example, experiments for Figure 3F were not described in the result session.

8) The findings of NR5a1 as a potential regulator of an unknown population of male germ cells are interesting but puzzling. NR5a1 has never been shown to be expressed in the testis by cells other than the somatic cell populations. The wholemount colocalization image is far from convincing.

9) Similarly, the unique expression of MBD3 in a subset of Sertoli cells is quite fascinating. However, the analysis was superficial and inconclusive. This subset of Sertoli cells should be SOX9 negative/low and AMH positive/high. Unfortunately, such confirmation is not available to support the conclusion.

10) The intent to link human GWAS data with the chromatin status of various cell types is reasonable and novel. Unfortunately, confirmation of the cell type-specific expression of several putative target genes (Wars, Mras, Ptpn11, etc) was not provided. The same problem is found in other analyses on Sertoli and Leydig cell stem cell types.